♪
Previously on
Star Trek: Discovery...
I am going to accept
President Rillak's offer
to serve as
a Federation ambassador.
I want to be with you.
I know what I stand for.
I know what I believe in.
I'm not apologizing for that.
I want you to be my number one.
I got a second chance once.
This is yours.
SARU:
Young Adira has been joined
with a Trill symbiont.
Welcome to the circle.
SARU:
Once they join with a host,
that host has the ability to
access the memories
of all former hosts.
GUARDIAN XI: It is my hope
that our work today
will allow you
to resume your training.
You're gonna make
a great Guardian someday.
Come with me.
Discovery'swhere I can
make a difference.
You're not scared
about long distance?
I have trust in us.
KOVICH:
We've been calling them
the Progenitors.
Somehow, Dr. Vellek
found their technology.
When he disappeared
800 years ago,
its location was lost with him.
Moll and L'ak don't have
this part of the clue,
so they're on
their way to Betazed.
What is this?
BURNHAM: We need to find
the other four pieces
to complete the map of clues
to the Progenitors' technology.
And the poem tells us
where to go next.
SARU:
"A world like no other,
where two souls entwine."
-I suppose...
-ADIRA: Trill.
We're going to Trill.
RAYNER:
They're smart, slippery as hell,
and don't give a damn
about anyone but themselves.
Meet Moll and L'ak.
Let's just say I know
more about the spirits
my abuelaused to pray to
than I do about these two.
BOOK:
Her name is Malinne.
She's the daughter of my mentor,
Cleveland Booker the fourth,
which
makes her the closest thing
to family I've got left.
♪
BURNHAM:
We need to know what
we're getting into
before we get to Trill. What
have you learned about L'ak?
CULBER:
Sorry, Captain,
still nothing on L'ak.
BURNHAM:
What about Moll?
Born on Callor Five,
rough place.
Cleveland left
when she was eight.
He used to talk about
how much he wanted
to fix things with her.
Never got the chance.
We did some digging.
Found out she lost
her mother at 14,
joined a courier guild at 17,
and did at least
two stints in an
Emerald Chain lockup.
She's been through a lot.
BOOK:
And always comes out on top.
If we run into them in Trill,
won't be pretty.
Yeah, I know
what you're about to say,
and it's a Federation world,
I have to bring in
a uniformed team.
But, if they do show up, I'll be
an asset, knowing what I do now.
A-And this is where you say
my personal connection to her
makes you nervous.
Convince me it shouldn't.
I'm learning from my choices.
I wouldn't be here
otherwise, so if you're
concerned with
what's personal, Michael,
this is how I get my life back.
Let me go to Trill with you.
BURNHAM:
Okay.
I'll think about it.
I'll see you in there.
Long day already?
No, I just couldn't sleep.
Brings up a lot
of big questions.
You too, huh?
Tossing and turning all night.
Have you tried Vulcan meditation
yet? Helped you as a kid.
Do you remember every detail
anyone's ever told you?
It's part of my job.
[Burnham laughs]
All right, what've we got?
A very big planet.
Trill has a surface area
of 500 million
square kilometers.
So, the question is,
where in all that area
are we gonna find our next clue?
Commander Stamets has been
working on the tricorder
recovered from the Romulan ship.
No help yet,
and we've been analyzing the
poem from Lyrek and...
We used a decryption algorithm
to try and find any coded
messages in the language syntax.
Nothing there,
but we did find this
on the metal piece
you recovered.
We realized that these markings
are consistent
with the patterns
of Trill facial spots.
Which are unique
to the individual.
As unique as fingerprints
in humans
or dorsal ridges in Saurians.
We asked Zora to try to locate
a possible match, so... Zora?
ZORA:
This is Jinaal Bix.
His facial markings
correspond precisely
with the markings on the clue
retrieved from Lyrek.
He lived 800 years ago,
at the same time
as the Romulan scientist.
[chuckles] So, this clue
points to a person.
ADIRA:
But Jinaal wasn't
your average Trill,
I think he was a symbiont host.
It would be
unusual for one
to live 800 years,
but not completely unheard of.
You think it could
still be alive?
ADIRA:
If so, then its
current host would have
all the memories of Jinaal Bix,
and we'd be able to ask them
a lot of questions.
And the Guardians
should have records
to help us find
the current host.
Ensign Tal, Dr. Culber,
I want you
with me on the away team.
Lieutenant Tilly, let me know
when the sensors pick up
L'ak and Moll back on Lyrek.
Can't imagine it'll be
too much longer.
Book, suit up,
you're coming with.
-[comms chime]
-CHRISTOPHER: Captain,
the new crew member's here.
Okay, I'll meet him
in my ready room.
Be ready to go in ten.
We've got a head start,
we need to use it.
Welcome aboard, Commander.
At your service, Captain.
I trust your quarters
are satisfactory.
They're fine. A little smaller
than I'm used to, but,
uh, then again,
I'm used to having your job.
That was meant as a joke,
to break the ice.
Mm. "Break the ice,"
that's an Earth idiom.
I'm reporting to a human
captain. I like to be prepared.
We're about to jump to Trill,
and while I'm on the surface,
I'll ask for you to do
one-on-ones with the crew.
No need. I've read their files.
I'd like you to connect
with them in person.
There are better ways to use me,
like tracking
Moll and L'ak for one.
I think we can both agree that
connection is not exactly
where my skill set lies.
Connection isn't a skill,
it's a choice.
The only interaction my crew
has had with you was on Q'Mau,
and it's left some skeptical
about my decision
to bring you on.
This is your chance
to show them why
you're right for the job.
To "break the ice."
One-on-ones, it is.
BURNHAM:
Everyone, this is
First Office Commander Rayner.
Lieutenant Naya,
Lieutenant Arav,
Commander Rhys,
Commander Asha,
and Lieutenants Gallo,
Linus,
and Christopher.
You'll meet Owosekun,
Detmer and the rest of the crew
in a little bit.
For now, we have
some place to be.
Black alert.
ADIRA:
Can't believe
I'm gonna see Gray.
It's been, like, six months
of holo chats
where we-we pretend
like everything's normal,
and it's obviously not.
Do I, um,
do I look... okay?
Please tell me
-I look okay.
-You look great, kid.
How many raktajinos
have you had?
Uh, two. I... [stammers]
I... Three.
Might be four, I don't know.
I just,
I... [chuckles]
really want everything
to be perfect today.
STAMETS:
Hey, give him my love, will you?
CHRISTOPHER [over comms]:
Ensign Tal,
Captain's asking for you
on the bridge.
Are you thinking
what I'm thinking?
Uh, yeah,
th-this jumble of numbers
from the Romulan tricorder,
I can't make sense of.
I was talking about Adira.
Come on, space dad,
six months apart,
and then being
that nervous to see him.
You were young once,
you know what that means.
Okay, that's not my business.
No.
Trouble in paradise, genius.
Six months of trying to act
like everything's normal?
[sighs] That kid's like
a lamb off to the slaughterhouse
right now.
-What?
-Yeah.
No. It'll be fine. They're fine.
-Should I be worried?
-Eh...
Everyone's on a journey.
We come together,
we come apart...
Wow.
I just sounded like
a woo-woo asshole.
Nah, they'll be fine, but
everything's got
a half-life, so...
BURNHAM:
Lieutenant Christopher,
request permission
to transport to Trill.
I'm sorry, Captain.
They're denying your request
to beam down.
-For what reason?
-CHRISTOPHER: They wouldn't say.
[comms chimes]
Guardian Xi would like
to speak with you.
-Put him through.
-CHRISTOPHER: Aye, Captain.
Guardian Xi, is there a problem?
There is.
The information you seek
has been protected
for centuries.
Before we assist,
there is a question
you must answer.
I'm not sure you understand
the stakes here...
This is not a matter for debate.
You must answer the question.
Then you better ask it.
Where does the fourth point?
What the hell
kind of question is that?
GUARDIAN XI:
I can say nothing further.
Where...
does the fourth point?
It's a riddle.
It's a reference to the poem
we found on Lyrek.
The hidden fifth stanza
led us here. The fourth stanza
seemed to point to Betazed.
The answer is Betazed.
That is correct.
I can tell you now
that the symbiont you seek
is indeed still alive.
Its current host, Kalzara Bix,
she will speak to no outsider
unless they answer that riddle.
Have others come looking?
No, you are the first.
Your team may transport
to the Caves of Mak'ala.
I will bring her shortly.
Before you go,
is there anything else
you can tell us about her?
Or he symbiont
or the poem on Lyrek?
I've never heard
of Lyrek, Captain,
and I know nothing of any poem.
My duty was simply to ask
the question
and verify the answer.
From here forward,
all will be up to you.
[takes deep breath]
♪
[original Star Trektheme
plays]
Welcome.
Kalzara is eager
to meet you.
-You knew the answer.
-Yes.
We are here for the clue.
We understand you have it.
I have been waiting for you
nearly my whole life,
but I cannot help you.
Only Jinaal can.
The original host?
Didn't he die
hundreds of years ago?
Jinaal joined with our symbiont
so that it could carry
his secrets across the ages
until a worthy
seeker arrived.
He requires that you speak
with him directly.
Please.
The symbiont is tired
and longs to rest. So do I.
How are we supposed to do this?
A zhian'tara.
It's a ritual that allows
Jinaal's consciousness
to transfer to another body
for a limited time.
GUARDIAN XI:
It cannot be a joined host,
but others from your team
may serve
as a vessel. I should
warn you, however, that
it can be an emotionally
overwhelming experience.
CULBER:
Captain, Jinaal can use me.
"Emotionally overwhelming"
is what I do best.
[sighs] Are you sure?
GUARDIAN XI:
It's decided then.
Gray, you can help me prepare.
It will be a valuable addition
to your training.
Yes, Guardian.
Oh, T'Rina. Good morning.
I have brought you a gift
for your new office,
a favinit plant.
Oh, it is quite lovely.
[sighs]
Oh.
Thank you.
I can imagine what a transition
this must be.
-[chuckles]
-After so many years
with Discoveryas your home.
Yes, well...
I do miss them all,
but I-I am excited
for this new challenge,
and I will admit,
a bit trepidatious.
No, I...
have been asked
to speak at today's
resource committee meeting,
on behalf of the planets
I represent.
The position I will advocate
is a controversial one.
I have no doubt you will perform
your duties commendably.
Shall we?
There is something else
I wish to discuss,
o-of a personal nature.
Our engagement announcement.
[stammers]
I reviewed the draft, and
there is one phrase
which I believe
may warrant reconsideration.
"The handsome
and erudite Captain Saru."
If it embarrasses you,
we will remove it,
but it is accurate
to say that you are both.
If there is nothing else
you would change,
I will have it sent out
within the day.
Please. It is all very exciting.
DUVIN:
Madam President.
I am ready with your briefing
for today's session.
Thank you, Mr. Duvin.
This is, of course,
Captain Saru.
I don't believe
you two have met.
It is a pleasure.
Our announcement is prepared,
with one small edit.
Once I have made that,
you may transmit
to the appropriate outlets.
Today, Madam President?
-Yes.
-Of course.
[sighs]
Ambassador.
When you are ready,
I shall see you inside.
Yes.
[doors whoosh open]
Excuse me, sir?
Lieutenant Tilly.
Captain Burnham asked me
to show you around the ship
to facilitate introductions.
Ah, she gave me a chaperone.
Uh, not sure I would agree with
that choice of words, but...
Introductions can wait.
I'm combing through sensor data
for any signs
of Moll and L'ak's ship.
That is the top priority
from an operational perspective.
If I could have permission
to speak freely, sir.
Zora's already monitoring
scanners in-in real time.
Crew cohesion is a top priority
as well, and, uh,
so... Plus, it's...
Captain's orders.
I didn't, Lieutenant.
Sorry, didn't what?
Give you permission
to speak freely.
But I can walk and chew gum.
-That is an Earth expression.
-Uh...
Yeah, no, it is.
I just, I don't know...
I'm not running
all over the ship.
They can report to me here
in the science lab.
Active duty roster
introductions, 1100 hours.
Schedule five minutes
with each of them.
-Hi.
Uh, do you have
a little time now, or...?
-Yeah, just finished.
-Uh...
Am I allowed to hug you
while you're on duty?
Quick, no one's looking.
[both chuckle]
I haven't actually
touched you in months.
Um...
Uh, the...
The captain said that we might
have some time off after this,
and I was wondering if maybe
I could see your quarters,
-or meet some
of the other trainees?
-Sure.
And, well, maybe...
there's some things
we should talk about, too.
Yeah.
GUARDIAN XI:
We are ready to begin.
[Guardian XI inhales sharply]
[Guardian XI speaking Trill]
GUARDIAN XI:
The transference is complete.
Jinaal's consciousness
is within him.
What year is it?
BURNHAM:
3191.
It's good to meet you, Jinaal.
I'm Captain Burnham
of the USS Discovery.
I love what they've done
with the uniform.
It's a little formal, though.
-Do you mind?
-Not at all.
[laughing]
What about you?
You're not Starfleet.
Unaffiliated
professional associate.
Ah. Got it.
You solved the poem
and the riddle.
Very impressive,
making it this far. [laughs]
And now you're here
for the clue.
-Yes. You have it?
-No.
But I can take you to it,
if you don't mind me getting
this uniform a little dirty.
I hid it in the canyons,
not too far from here.
800 years ago?
Oh, don't worry,
Professional Associate.
It'll still be there.
I hide things very well.
BURNHAM:
Well, we can beam there.
We have
personal transporters now.
Oh, I don't remember
the coordinates.
I just remember the path.
Besides, I can't tell you
how much I miss the feeling
of a nice, long walk.
-BURNHAM: We don't have time.
-JINAAL: It'll be fine.
Ensign, uh, stay here with
Kalzara and keep comms open.
-Aye, Captain.
-Come on, keep up.
You have a lifetime.
I only have a few hours.
Wow. This guy really works out.
[loud, overlapping chatter]
My world needs a new starbase.
We have all heard
what's happening with the Breen.
They're growing
increasingly dangerous
as the warring factions
vie for control.
Which is why it is vital
that all member worlds
receive fair attention,
including yours.
While adopting this change
would delay your starbase,
I would also suggest and support
an immediate increase in patrols
in your sector,
subject to President Rillak's
approval, of course.
In such a scenario, would you
consider your security needs
to be appropriately addressed?
Yes. That would be satisfactory.
In that case...
All in favor?
All opposed?
The revision has been adopted.
Thank you.
Let's take a short recess.
May I have a word?
-Of course.
-Ah.
Ah.
How may I help you, Mr. Duvin?
I am curious what, if anything,
President T'Rina has told you
of the conflicts her coalition
has had with the Vulcan Purists.
Oh, I know
there has been conflict.
Indeed.
And as you were speaking,
I found myself wondering
how they might make political
fodder out of your remarks.
What you said could be seen
as a criticism
of Ni'Var,
itself a larger world.
And the fact that
President T'Rina voted with you
-makes it...
-She did not vote with me.
She voted according
to her own values
and the needs of the Federation.
While that may be true,
appearances matter.
In politics,
they are often all that matters.
Typically, I would speak
with her directly,
but I fear her logic is clouded
by both her love for you
and her strong disapproval
of the Vulcan Purists.
Therefore, logic and reason
dictates that I approach you.
As you live in a near-constant
state of emotional compromise,
you are therefore better
equipped to behave logically.
With respect,
your argument is
a touch circuitous.
I am not sure
I am clear on your point.
My point is that
President T'Rina's betrothal
to someone from another world
brings with it
many complications.
Its announcement at this time
would be like adding a spark
to a keg of cabrodine.
And in case
I'm once again being unclear,
the president's political future
would be the keg.
♪
BURNHAM:
For starters,
how did you get the clue?
Did you... did you know
Dr. Vellek?
Were you with him when he found
the Progenitors' technology?
You ask a lot of questions.
How about we just enjoy
the walk, smell the air?
We don't have time
to smell the air, okay?
Others are coming,
and they're way less friendly.
If they got their hands
on what you're hiding,
it would be a disaster.
[distant screeching]
What was that?
An itronok,
a carnivorous quadruped
about three times your height,
extremely vicious.
I studied them
while I was still alive.
-These canyons
are their hunting grounds.
-BOOK: Yeah.
That seems like something
you could've mentioned before.
JINAAL:
Would that've changed your mind?
Anyone sane knows
to stay away this place,
which made it perfect
for hiding the clue.
These answers you want--
if I give them to you,
they might cost you your life.
You sure it's worth it?
We've already risked our lives
to come this far.
We're sure.
All right.
800 years ago,
the Federation president
brought together
six scientists in secret:
me, Dr. Vellek and four others,
Federation and non-Federation.
Don't ask me their names.
I won't tell you.
I will tell you
that our mission was
to research the Progenitors
and their message.
The one Captain Picard found.
Yes.
It took years,
but eventually led us
to a sector of deep space
where we found a technology...
beyond anything we'd ever seen.
One of our group tried
to activate it,
and he was killed.
It was horrible.
After that,
the rest of us made a pact.
Told the president
that we'd hit a dead end,
destroyed all of our research,
removed our names from
every database we could access.
And we hid the location
of what we'd found.
Why didn't you give it to
the Federation for safekeeping?
The Dominion War was raging.
Everyone saw an enemy
in everyone else.
And we knew
that technology could be used
for great destruction.
Protecting it became the focus
of our lives.
Nothing was more important.
[screeching]
That was way closer.
We'd better pick up the pace.
TILLY:
Sir?
Moll and L'ak are at Lyrek.
Uh, I know, sir.
Zora told me.
Uh, Commander Rhys is here
for his meeting,
so I'll give you two
some privacy.
No need for that. Stay.
In 20 words or less,
tell me something about yourself
I couldn't read in your file.
[Rhys clears throat]
I'm a real ship-head.
Love the Crossfield,
but something about the curves
of a 23rd century
Constitution class just gets me.
That was 22 words.
Thank you.
Dismissed.
The worst thing I've ever seen
in the sickbay was a Bynar
with a Dakalan boreworm
eating its synaptic processor.
Growing up on Bajor, my
nicknames were "Full Monopoly"
and "Bluff Master," so, yeah,
I'm pretty much unbeatable
at tongo.
Saurians reproduce asexually,
but we do not meet our progeny.
They're instead raised
by the community.
I've laid three clutches.
Okay. [clears throat]
When Nilsson left
for her new post on Voyager,
-she gave me
her pet tribble, and...
-[Tilly clears throat]
Oh, don't worry.
It's been neutered.
[sighs softly]
Last time I did this,
they gave me chips.
Okay, I'll save my drag racing
story for next time. [chuckles]
It was nice meeting you.
Uh, they were in the middle
of a sentence, sir.
-I got the gist.
-Sir, if you only spend
30 seconds with each
crew member, how can you...?
The meetings are exactly as long
as they need to be, Lieutenant.
I'll send Commander Owosekun in.
Mm-hmm.
Understood. Uh, keep me posted.
What's going on?
Our sensors on Lyrek.
Might be some trouble coming.
But it's-it's nowhere
near hear yet, so...
So that's good news, right?
Well, I hope so. [laughs]
You said there was something
that you wanted
-to talk to me about?
-Yeah, I just...
I just...
It seems like
you've been doing really well.
-[laughs softly]
-And I've been good, too.
Great, actually.
But I think we both feel
like things seem different
between us.
Holo's just not the same.
No, you're right.
You're right. Um, things have
felt very different.
I think that's why
I was so nervous to see you.
Because I knew
we'd have to talk about it,
and I don't know
how to start that conversation.
But, I mean,
it makes sense, right?
We literally used
to be connected.
And now,
I'm following my path here,
and you're following yours
on Discovery.
Mm.
It's a big change.
Maybe we just need
to see each other more often.
So, I can...
I can put in for more leave,
and I can... I can even ask
about transferring.
I wouldn't want you
to do that for me.
Just like you wouldn't want me
to give this up for you.
Yeah.
No, you're right.
I'm not sure what else to do.
Well, I mean,
if things aren't working
the way they are right now,
maybe we could try
something different.
Like, there are so many kinds
of relationships.
I don't know
if I can do this any other way.
So does that mean...?
Are we saying we're breaking up?
I, uh... Yeah, I guess.
I guess so.
I think you're right.
I think this is the right thing.
-This is the right thing.
-Ooh. [chuckles]
But I'll always be here for you.
No matter what.
Well, me, too.
Always.
You know
where the technology is.
Why not just tell us
so we can secure it?
We can actually skip
this whole clue trail.
No.
We created the clues so that
no one could reach the end
unless they follow
the full path.
We wanted the power to be found,
but only by a worthy seeker,
and only
when the time was right.
A time of peace
when species have evolved enough
to use it only for good.
So tell me, in 3191,
has that time come?
This isa time of peace, yeah.
[sighs]
-You don't look so sure.
-Oh, I am.
But I can't promise you
it'll last.
Advancement isn't linear.
I do know
that the Federation is driven
by a will to do good.
Most sentient beings are.
There are plenty
who would disagree with that.
Good outweighs the bad.
Truly believe that.
I think you
and your fellow scientists
must have believed it, too.
Otherwise, you wouldn't have
left these clues.
You would've destroyed
all evidence it ever existed.
That, Captain,
is a very fair point.
Book, what is it?
Oh.
JINAAL:
An ina raptor, itronok prey.
Fresh kill.
They're closer than I thought.
Have your phasers ready.
[screeching]
BURNHAM: We might have company
soon. How close are we?
JINAAL:
Right around this corner.
Okay. There.
That's where the clue is hidden.
There's a carving.
Just below it is a crack
that opens into a compartment
I built into the rock.
That's it.
-Yeah.
-Wait!
[screeching]
[phasers whirring]
[quietly]:
They can cloak?
Their scales control
the way light refracts.
That's another thing
you could've mentioned, Jinaal.
-Ooh!
-Take cover!
Whoa, the hits just
keep on coming.
Once agitated, they don't
back down. We have to go. Now!
No, we can't.
We need the clue.
-You're not getting it tonight.
-What? There has to be a way.
There's no way.
We stay, we die.
This body, your friend, dies.
I'm not gonna let that happen.
Jinaal.
BOOK:
Damn it.
[quietly]:
We have to find a way past it.
See if you can
communicate with it.
[roaring]
I can't. Connection's a two-way
process. It's blocking me.
-Could you pick up on anything?
-Yeah. It's really pissed off.
Hmm. We didn't need
empathy powers to tell us that.
Time for plan B, then?
-On the count of three.
-Hey, hey.
Is it on three or after three?
Like, is it "One, two, three,"
or "One, two, three, go"?
Second option.
One, two, three, go.
-[bellowing]
-Hey!
-Go then.
[screeching]
[grunts]
BOOK:
Hurry up!
I can't see it anymore!
Keep looking.
[itronok screeching]
-[screeching]
-BOOK: There you are.
BOOK:
Michael, there's another one!
BURNHAM:
I need more time!
Michael!
-[Book groaning loudly]
-[gasping]
[screeching]
Over there.
-[screeching]
-[grunting] Go!
-[groans]
-Oh.
[both panting]
BURNHAM:
Go in there.
They must have found that poem
on Lyrek, right?
Sir, is that a question
for me, sir?
No.
-Didn't think so.
-Sorry I'm late.
I was working on the data
from the Romulan tricorder,
and I think
I've finally figured it out.
As long
as it's mission-critical,
use as many words as you'd like.
Uh, well, um, the thing is,
I hadn't accounted
for half-life.
The Progenitors' technology is
several billion years old,
so, of course that would result
in significant decay
of numerous isotopes.
I don't fully understand it yet,
but the technology is...
It could have
incredible applications.
One could use it
to design new life-forms,
accelerate evolution,
modify ecosystems.
And if it can create life,
then, in theory,
it might even be possible
to reanimate dead organisms.
That sounds like it'd be very
dangerous in the wrong hands.
Well, yes,
but think of all the good
[laughing]:
it could do in the right ones!
It could make even
the spore-drive discovery
inconsequential by comparison.
Commander, you have
any more data to share?
Um... no, I guess not.
Then your 20 words are up.
You're dismissed.
Nice to meet you,
too, Commander.
Okay. What?!
What?
I haven't seen him that excited
in so long.
Why-why did you have
to shut him down like that?
I got the information I needed.
Now I'm moving on.
-Oh.
-Who's next?
Ey. Uh, since you won't give me
permission to speak freely,
I'm just gonna take it.
Captain Burnham--
she sees something in you,
but for the life of me,
I have no idea what it is.
So, how about this? How about
I'm next? Here are my 20 words.
Uh, you're on a new ship,
fresh off a demotion,
trying to hide how hard that is
by being a giant...
Oh, that's 20 words, so...
Excuse me, sir.
I have work to do.
[sighs]
Uh, T'Rina,
I have been considering
our engagement announcement.
I-I believe the...
It has not yet gone out?
No, but within a few hours.
Ah. Uh, I wonder if perhaps
we should consider postponing.
Well, it-it is a very busy time
for you.
And of course,
there is my new position.
A public declaration may bring
undue pressure.
And as I recall,
a wise Vulcan once said,
"To rush a sehlat is
to risk a goring."
Duvin spoke with you,
did he not?
I...
He did.
He advised me not to announce.
I took that into account
and decided otherwise.
So now he turns to you.
He seemed quite clear that
it would not be in the interest
of your political career.
I employ Duvin because he is
a shrewd political operator,
but that does not mean that he
or anyone else, including you,
understands my own interests
better than I.
But if you would experience
a challenge
from the Vulcan Purists,
we must consider that.
Uh, I simply wish to protect you
in all ways that I can.
It is unclear to me what would
have given you the impression
that I'm in need of caretaker.
MALE [over comm]:
Excuse me, President T'Rina.
President Rillak is ready
for you.
There is work to attend to.
Excuse me. I must go.
Uh... [sighs]
[door whooshes open]
[door whooshes closed]
[screeching,
growling in distance]
Okay. We have
to get the barb out.
All right?
Then I'm gonna hit it
with the dermal regenerator.
It's gonna stop the bleeding.
-On the count of three.
-Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
-Three.
-[yells]
[panting]
What happened
to "after three," Michael?
Doesn't hurt as much
when you're not expecting it.
[laughing]:
I'm sorry.
-[screeching]
-BOOK: Hey, over there.
[Burnham panting]
BOOK:
Those aren't rocks.
-Those are eggs.
-Right.
They're protecting their young
just like any parent would.
Then there's no justification
for antagonizing them,
no matter what's hidden here.
Jinaal was right.
We're gonna have to come back
for the clue.
[Burnham panting]
All right. Let's beam out.
We can catch up to him
on the canyon.
-That's not good.
-We're too close to the rock.
The mineral composition
is interfering
-with the transporter signal.
-Okay.
-What do you want to do?
BURNHAM:
Um...
I got an idea.
Basic xenoanthropology--
show respect
to the one you're studying.
Michael, don't.
-Trust me.
-Don't do it.
-[rattling]
-[sighs]
[exhales deeply]
[whirring]
[screeching]
Have you lost your mind?
Our phasers made us seem
like a threat.
Try to communicate
with them again. Now.
Tell them we're sorry
and-and that we are leaving.
[loud bellowing]
[screeching]
They're letting us go.
BURNHAM:
We'll find another way
to get that clue.
♪
[chuckles]
Jinaal!
I've missed this--
the simple pleasure
of gazing at the stars.
I see you survived.
Skin of our teeth.
You knew that was their
nesting ground, didn't you?
And you had us draw our phasers
to incite them.
Why?
[chuckling]
I had to know what you'd do
when you encountered a life-form
vastly different than your own.
Would you just see an enemy,
or would you try to connect?
That's vital for whoever gets
the Progenitors' technology.
As is the belief
in the potential
for goodness in all beings.
Proceed wisely, Captain.
Associate.
And the carving
on the rock face?
I believe
you'd call that a red herring.
-Hmm.
-Never understood that.
-Herrings aren't even red.
-[Burnham chuckles]
-I think that's the point.
-Ah.
-I still don't get it.
-BOOK: Out of curiosity,
if we hadn't proven worthy,
would you have let
the itronoks kill us?
To protect
the Progenitors' power?
BOOK:
Uh-huh.
Yes.
These are the coordinates
for the next clue?
JINAAL:
They are. Good luck, Captain.
[indistinct crowd chatter]
T'Rina, um,
might you have a moment?
[Saru sighs]
I have been terribly uneasy
since our tea.
I have given it much thought,
and have come to realize
that what I was trying to do
was not what you asked for,
nor what you needed.
I apologize.
I accept.
The matter is already
in the past.
Does that response trouble you?
No. Uh, quite the opposite.
I... I feared
a far worse outcome. [chuckles]
You see,
I have never
experienced conflict
with someone I love in this way.
Conflict is a natural part
of any relationship,
-and not to be feared.
-Hmm.
It is a natural part
of political life, as well.
Duvin is correct.
The announcement will enflame
the Vulcan Purists.
But if it were to come out
that we were engaged
and had not announced,
that would erode
my citizens' trust.
That would make it seem as
though I was hiding something,
and we have nothing to hide.
In that case,
I would like to announce
as soon as possible.
And if difficulties arise,
it will be my honor to stand
beside you to face them.
[gasps]
GUARDIAN XI:
Zhian'tara has ended.
Jinaal has left you.
Jinaal feels deep gratitude
for the extra moments of life
you have given him.
The experience was, um...
Well, I-I...
I don't have the words.
I am glad you found
what you needed, Captain.
BURNHAM:
So am I.
There are some very dangerous
people that won't be.
I'm sorry. We think
that they're on their way here.
I can assist with a team
for protection.
No need. Trill security is more
than capable of handling them.
Okay. Dr. Culber,
you should beam
to sickbay for a checkup.
You should beam back, too.
Have Dr. Pollard take a look
at your leg.
Adira.
I'll see you back on board.
Kalzara, thank you
for everything.
Thank you, for now I can rest.
[indistinct chatter]
[laughter]
BARTENDER:
Welcome to Red's. I'll be
right back for your order.
That looks radioactive.
I realize we did not get off on
the best foot today, Lieutenant,
but leadership and friendship
are two different beasts.
Professional distance
keeps the distinction clear.
My crew understood that.
We had a shorthand,
a mutual trust.
Well, in my experience,
sir, it helps
if the crew believes
you actually care about them.
Hmm.
Commander Rhys has an extensive
and comprehensive interest
in starships
that goes far beyond
the tactical.
If he wanted,
he could have a bright future
in the Command division.
Pollard has stared into the void
and made it blink.
Nothing frightens that woman.
Linus cares deeply
for tradition and stability,
evident in his dedication to his
people's child-rearing ways.
And Reno, well...
Shall I go on?
Analyzing them is not the same
as connecting with them,
or showing them respect.
-Respect has to be earned.
-I agree, sir.
And that goes both ways.
[indistinct chatter, laughter]
Hmm.
We are making preparations
to jump to the coordinates
from the clue.
But they're in Tzenkethi space
so we can't go until
the diplomats clear the way.
Ah, red tape, your favorite.
Today must have been something.
Yeah. Having another
consciousness inside of me?
I mean, I was there,
but I wasn't.
How is that even possible?
How does that work?
How do I begin
to explain any of that?
I suppose you can't.
At least not
with the science we have now.
Doesn't mean it's unknowable.
Right?
Maybe.
Makes me think of my abuela.
She was a doctor, too.
She filled her home
with religious icons--
Catholic Church,
Buddhism, Santeria,
all sorts of faiths.
She used to tell me
that it was a reminder
that not everything has
to have an answer.
But I'm not sure
I'm okay with that.
Yeah, I get that.
What do you mean?
Jinaal said something
as we were walking back,
and he was right.
I amsearching.
This technology,
it's the closest
that we'll ever get
to the beings
who designed life as we know it.
Maybe by the end of the journey,
we willfind the answers
we need.
Both of us.
♪
GRAY:
The life of a symbiont is
a journey that spans centuries.
Each host it passes through
changes it,
and it changes each in return.
The lesson this teaches us is
that every life is a journey.
A series of changes.
We must work to understand thoe
we encounter on our journey.
We must choose to connect.
Not just with others...
but also, with ourselves.
Sometimes we fail.
Sometimes we succeed.
Either way, we must keep tryin.
Because we have to.
Because we're all looking
for meaning in our lives.
And in the end,
the connections we make
will lead us there.
GUARDIAN XI:
Thank you, Gray.
[Guardian XI speaking Trill]
♪
[indistinct chatter]
[chatter continues]
Captioning sponsored by
CBS
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org